hey in case you hadn't guessed apart
from suffering from severe jetlag and
overall fatigue and exhaustion this has
been the first week of a new semester at
University and I have a whole stack of
books here that I'm expected to read in
a very short span of time
and then I'm very unlikely to read any
great percentage of putting together a
short video now reflecting on my own
experience with long-distance cycling a
lot of people react in a sort of
defensive way when you get into the
practical nitty-gritty of the meaning of
life I have experience doing
long-distance cycling and I have gone on
long distance bike trips in Thailand and
Laos I've never really talked about that
on this YouTube channel before it's it's
something I have in common with
durianrider which won't have much in
common
but I do have experience going more than
100 kilometres a day on a bike in that
part of Asia obviously never as a
serious athlete or not as someone even
aspiring to be an athlete and you know
at the end of my engagement with that
sport or hobby I really felt that it was
a waste of time although obviously the
effects in your physical fitness can be
dramatic so it's gonna put together a
video reflecting a little bit on the
pragmatics of the meaning of life and
the art of long-distance cycling in the
tropics my own motivations how I felt
about it before after enduring I know
this is of special interest to some
vegans and I I this idea was put in my
head because of my most recent video I
did comment on the fact that I made a
long-distance cycling trip in the north
of Laos on dirt roads connecting some
obscure villages then afterwards I
reflected boy I've never I've never
talked about that online before neither
in writing nor nor on YouTube videos I
think so for some people who know me
that that might come as a surprise I
don't know for some not so much in the
other side of this is you know of all
the subjects I've ever
received hate mail for online I probably
received the most intense hate mail for
two subjects one being a casual comment
that playing video games was a waste of
time back when I had a blog on veganism
I received really vitriolic response how
dare you say playing video games is a
waste of time and it was a similar
extreme response to comments about
smoking marijuana as a waste of time and
as something that causes brain damage
which is scientifically proven by MRI
scans that is not an opinion sadly the
brain damage caused by alcohol and by
marijuana use is now something we have
mapped out and quantified quite
precisely in the medical sciences
although people are very strong motives
to ignore this evidence as with all the
evidence the eating meat is bad for you
people go into a similar sort of denial
so seeing something as a waste of time
is not the same as saying it's evil it's
not even saying it's bad or the wrong
choice for you if if you have the time
to spare I had a period of doing long
cycling trips I had a girlfriend who had
broken up with and actually even before
the breakup I went on a really long bike
trip I went from vientiene the capital
city of Laos to Chiang Mai by bicycle
and at that time I knew that she and I
were going to break up in the future so
I had that to sort of think about but
actually the reason for that bike trip
was I relied on a Macintosh at that time
you could not use a Windows computer in
the languages I needed I was using
languages like Cinelli's and Burmese and
particularly the literary forms of those
languages as they're used to write
classical vocabulary from antiquity so
if you want to be able to type Pali in
Sinhalese or in Burmese with the
ligatures and orthography associated
with a tradition at that time it was
impossible on a Windows computer and it
was just barely possible on a Mac dog
this face to say I relied on this maca
Tasha had and when it stopped working
for herself her reasons the nearest Mac
store I could go to was him Chiang Mai
so I undertook that journey going west
along the Mekong but I mean I was not a
serious athlete although I did do more
than 100 kilometres a day when I went on
bike trips you know I had no serious
aspirations to ever become a competitive
cyclist or even even a serious hobbyist
in that sense and you know when
something went wrong when for instance
it started raining I would stop riding
my bike and I would take the bus I'm in
torrential rain in the tropics
you can't fight against on a bicycle so
you know if you're actually trying to
cover the distance in a number of days
and then maybe get back to your job or
your life you know you're not on
vacation then what is starts raining
you're gonna take the bus and other such
things um one of my main reasons for
riding a bike at that time was
self-defense and that may seem
paradoxical at first because riding a
bike is not like practicing kung-fu or
boxing but I did get a lot of exercise
you get full body exercise riding bike
and the particular type of bicycle I
rode and the way I had it set up I
actually had a lot of weight in my arms
I would have my weight in my arms and my
feet and very little of my weight on the
bike seat it's a preference for a
writing style so really you know the
triceps and your wrists and I would have
a lot of weight carried in my arms which
again I think serious cyclists avoid
they don't want to fatigue their arms
but um doing long distance like that it
kept me in shape where I felt I was
ready to react if I was in a violent
situation suddenly it wasn't my only
exercise sometimes I had access to a gym
when I was living in Southeast Asia as
sometimes I didn't when I didn't I would
try to have a couple of free weights
around but mostly I'd rely on
long-distance cycling and doing 200
push-ups push-ups per day 200 push-ups
per day
and that would keep me in shape where I
felt I could handle a situation if
someone come at came at me with a
machete and that did happen eventually
you know there are violent situations
you deal with and there are violent
situations that you prevent simply by
being prepared and alert there's no
doubt that I had dramatically less
violence in my life simply because I
never drank alcohol never went to
nightclubs never went at the sorts of
places where I would be exposed to
violence but even if I was walking
through the streets at night whether the
streets of pnom pan or vientiene or
Bangkok the fact that I was alert and
sober is a huge difference anyway one of
the main reasons for riding a bicycle
was just that other reasons were the
ability to basically explore villages
you otherwise wouldn't see in Laos and
Thailand sorry coming back to the main
thread of my argument here I remember I
was breaking up with this girlfriend and
you know in the time leading up to the
breakup and immediately after the
breakup I would do a lot of thinking
about that I would meditate on the
break-up and the associated emotions and
what it meant to me and where I was
going with my life well riding this
bicycle long distances and you learn to
think in a very strange measured way
when you're going fast long distances on
a bicycle because you're shifting your
focus or shifting your attention between
the road beneath you and the road ahead
of you and things to either side you're
you're sort of scanning the environment
around you at all times in a particular
way and you can't allow yourself to get
lost in thought so it's a very strange
frame of mind you have to maintain while
riding a bike
you're never relaxed but you're also
never stressed out um I think that's why
some people find the sport so addictive
this this sense of alertness that you
learn to cultivate while riding a bike
but I remember one day you know just as
certain is turning a page I was doing
this I was doing one of these
long-distance bike rides and I thought
I'd nothing more to think about oh I've
done so much thinking over so many hours
of riding his bicycle long distance this
is it I'm done thinking yeah I mean
unless some other major events happen to
me that I haven't thought through yet I
have no more reason to do this I'm I'm
you know this is just a waste of my time
and I starting on that day I did switch
up my habits I started going to the gym
more and I I cancelled the long-distance
bike rides now as I recall I think my
trip to the gym was something like 15
kilometers each way so I ride my bike 15
K work help I'm about back that didn't
last that long that was well was living
in in the city of Han Chen but it's a
different story each place that lived in
Asia whether or not access to a gym and
whether or not I had a bicycle with me
and what I could do with that bicycle um
I just saw a video from a fellow vegan
on YouTube and he was lamenting his own
sense of addiction to exercise and how
it relates to his sense of identity and
value and so on he describes himself as
someone who struggled with anorexia and
orthorexia this is not my opinion it's
his own opinion of himself and he
participated in the Thai fruit Festival
and their ritual of blowing up toys to
tap toy steps name of a mountain and
Thailand and how for him at least it was
an unhealthy obsession or became an
unhealthy obsession I think it is worth
questioning whether or not the bicycle
and long distance cycling is becoming an
unhealthy obsession for vegans in
general it is just a method of exercise
like any other but obviously for many
people it symbolizes virility a second
youth in some ways it symbolizes the
same sort of illusion of Independence
that a motorcycle
symbolize for people a few generations
ago and you know the reality of
long-distance cycling in a sense is none
of those things any little thing that
goes wrong and you know your bike trip
is over if you're unlucky your life is
over I had a number of close calls where
the bike could have ended my life or
came close to seriously injuring me I
still have broken bones in one of my
wrists from a bike accident and actually
that's part of the story of why I had
that Macintosh computer with me and why
I was struggling to type those Asian
languages using my Mac before I broke
the bones in my wrist in a bike accident
I had actually decided after
investigating it there was no point in
trying to use a computer and I started
this new period of my life working on
these different languages because the
software was so obtuse and
counterproductive and said okay I'm just
gonna do all this stuff through
handwriting and during the whole period
I did I mean I did write those languages
by hand is a crucial part of language
learning and practice by the way but I
had excellent handwriting in the cinah
Lee's Burmese lao tai cambodian it's
insane i can't my ability to speak any
of those languages was incredibly
limited but I did cultivate handwriting
and Pali Pali as the hill fraca Pali as
the bridging language and all those
traditions for me um so I did spend a
lot of time doing everything but when I
broke those bones in my wrist in a bike
accident that then suddenly forced me to
depend on typing and then to re-evaluate
my priorities and I was learning because
I didn't know when my wrist healed if I
really have decent handwriting with my
right hand again I didn't know to what
extent had recover to what extent of
chronic pain or lost ability to to write
even in English but definitely in second
and third languages
I remember I was going down the side of
a mountain in sorry it was in Thailand
but near the Cambodian border it's a
panel it's not really a mountain but
it's it's a big hill traditionally
called a mountain all I can remember as
often the case when you're in a real
emergency like that you know time seems
to slow down your adrenaline kicks in or
what have you I was coming down this
mountain very quickly and I thought to
myself you know what all of my attention
is always focused on the road and
managing the minutiae of the bike you
know make sure it makes fine with a bike
I really need to slow down and pay more
attention to the beauty of my
surroundings and I looked around and the
view from the side of this mountain at
that moment there was an ornamental pond
this is a traditional ornamental pond
it's been restored by you know
Thailand's archeological committee but
it's part of an ancient Cambodian temple
or palace complex incredibly beautiful
you know simple tropical beauty and I'm
looking over at it for just a split
second I thought to myself well that's
exactly what I mean that's what I'm
talking about I should I shouldn't just
be staring at the road I should be
actually taking my surroundings and when
I turned my attention back to the road
there was a huge gap open in front of me
looking like the jaws of death had
opened to swallow me whole because what
the what the road building crew had done
there instead of using poured concrete
they had used slabs of steel reinforced
concrete right for whatever reason the
side of that hill it's irregular in
highway construction and the slab of
concrete had snapped so unlike a pothole
you had a sudden break in the concrete
and like teeth sprouting out of this
mouth there were sharp spikes
of rusted steel because it's it's the
same stuff for make buildings out of its
rebar it's it's steel reinforced
concrete of course where the steel is
exposed by the concrete breaking the
steel gets rust it was a cartoonishly
sinister situation and in the split
seconds remain to me my ability to do
anything was extremely limited I was on
a proper racing bike not a hybrid not
eternal by a racing bike with racing
tires and I did with all of my strength
in my arms you know control the bike
because I went through that crash and I
stayed on top of it so I didn't I know
part of my skin touched the concrete
that was the miracle of it but it
completely caved in my front tire so in
some ways had a very good recovery from
that crash and managed it really well
it's really just using her hands on the
steering wheel and keeping yourself
upright at any and any cost
now I'm in the middle of nowhere near
the Thai Cambodian border near this
ancient temple I'm thinking oh my god my
bike is now completely incapacitated my
ability to repair it this kind of severe
total destruction of my tire I didn't
have the kit with me to to repair or
replace that I had some you know tools
with me and so on though what am I gonna
do
and so I went down the rest of the side
of this mountain this small Hilton and
there at the bottom looking up at me
because from the distance they could
either hear or see me as this happened
were three guys local Cambodian guys you
know Thai citizens but ethnically
Cambodian um who were running a tire
repair shop for motorcycle
now you know they didn't they didn't
usually handle racing bicycles but
obviously they you know they were
confident they knew their way around a
bike
so I wasn't reduced to hitchhiking or
being room and there were no cars it was
an obscure small road so it would have
been a long time would have had to
probably walk many kilometers carrying
my bike to get back to civilization but
that was that the Inc the decline or the
incline of that hill it was very very
steep that's why that happened to me at
all at that moment why wasn't
why was they even aware and if I've been
thrown off that bike and gone down that
hill or if I had gone over the side it
wasn't a quite a cliff to the side but
it was an extreme drop leading down to
that ornamental lake that could have
really been trouble these types of
stories about injuries potential and
actual may all seem like fun and games
but I just want to insert a comment that
these really were of some instrumental
importance in my decision to stop riding
a bike so if you follow my channel you
know I'm currently divorced I was
formerly married therefore I can
remember when I was with my wife and
with my girlfriend who became my wife
she asked me at several points if I
wanted to resume this this hobby of the
sport if I was going to start running a
bike long distance again and I told her
no because I couldn't risk this kind of
injury because she depended on me now
the most extreme dependency of course is
when we actually had a child together
when she when my wife was pregnant with
a newborn baby I couldn't afford to be
sick for one day or to be absent for one
day every day and every minute mattered
but even when you're not in
circumstances that demanding or extreme
right now I'm at university if I were
riding a bike around and I had an injury
that took me out of classes for just two
weeks that actually really would have a
devastating effect on my life even
though right now I live alone there's
nobody else depending on me I remember
she was really struck by that Office's
she'd had other boy
in the past before me and she said she'd
never been with someone who thought of
things that way before
but for me it would have been
irresponsible to start cycling again
because my girlfriend depended on me
later because my wife depended on me
later because my daughter depended on me
and to a single man or to a teenager
with no responsibilities what might seem
like a relatively trivial injury really
is not trivial at all as soon as you
have responsibilities in life as soon as
other people depend on you probably the
one incident where I came closest to
actually dying again happened in a few
split seconds but it was in the city of
yunchan now this also is a political
component to it
vn chen when there was a visiting
dignitary from vietnam the whole city
would shut down and everything would
change one-way streets would change
direction flags we put up here and there
intersections would change they would
really reorder traffic in the downtown
core of the city so that when the
vietnamese official arrived whoever was
in the government of Vietnam maybe an
army general some other representative
would be able to roll down the Main
Street in their car and all of the
school children from the local communist
schools would be in uniform waving
Vietnamese Vietnamese flags in unison to
welcome the dignitaries that would be
this formal communist ceremony showing
respect and admiration and normal life
for most of the downtown core the city
would would shut down so on my bike on
one such day when the city had been
reordered and none of this is properly
signed or explained anyone I went down a
street and this is in the same area
where the French Embassy is and where a
number of other government buildings are
where the street is almost like a tunnel
because there were high security walls
on either side of the street and not
really any sidewalk
and went down this street that
unbeknownst to me I was unaware it was
one way going against me just on that
day wasn't the usual situation as I came
down this street a bus came around the
corner accelerating out of the corner
dead at me so I wasn't on the edge of
this bus I was going right into the
middle of the bus face to face and the
bus not only wasn't slowing down it was
accelerating toward me and the bus
driver looked up from the wheel at me
and even though it was only a split
second there was such an expression in
the guy's face because he realized he
was about to kill me I'm not describing
it in more detail but you can use your
imagination but this was a situation
where a bus had come around a corner
with no visibility with these high walls
on either side and was accelerating
towards me and I was I was myself moving
head at a decent speed on my bike right
into the bus and again I could see the
expression on the bus drivers face we
were that close and I realized there was
no way I would have time to turn my bike
or otherwise guide my bike out of the
way and what I did by the way I never
wore clip shoes if I was wearing clip
shoes I don't know what I could have
done to handle this I was wearing boots
on solid steel pedals and I hopped up
simply lifting my weight up with the
strength of my legs I hopped off the
bike off the pedals onto one side and my
assumption was I would just leave the
bike to get run over by the bus but as I
did that as I hopped off the bike the
bike then a half second later it lifted
up off the ground and that was just
because my weight had come off the bike
so suddenly there's some springiness and
the tires whatever you so you know my
weight coming up off the bike then the
bike itself lifted up
and without having time to really look I
reached out with my hand behind me and
grabbed the frame of the bike and then
as I was tumbling because I then left
and you know half jump I fell to get to
the side of the road so the bus wouldn't
hit me I carried the bike with me and
then I got to see as I looked up as I
made my landing and scuttled the side of
the road I got to see the expression the
bus drivers face and he was totally
elated because he had been so
crestfallen just a half owned before
thinking he was about to kill me and he
was gonna have to explain to the police
why he'd killed this white tourist in
Delft yet I wasn't a tourist you
understand but I'm sure for the purposes
of the police report it was wrecked in
town as such to my not only escaping
unharmed but also the the bike being
carried with me um look you know I had
my reasons for getting involved with
long-distance cycling and I had my
reasons for giving up on it when I did
also ultimately you know it is
meaningless and it is a bit of a waste
of time if you're living in Thailand you
don't speak Thai I think obviously
learning the Thai language should be a
higher priority for you
same for Laos and learning Lao and same
for so many other countries if you're
gonna move to the Netherlands you should
learn to speak Dutch etc etc obviously
if you have the time if you have the
money riding a bicycle is a much more
beautiful way to spend your time and
money then many of the things that
people do
but you know there's this there's this
ancient saying that's stuck with me even
though I never really learned Latin or
Greek equal this league no that's
literally from any block of wood the
full phrase implied meaning from any
block of wood an idol can be carved
anything no matter how simple or
utilitarian can become a fetish can
become an obsession can become an idol
in your life and definitely I mean the
bicycle can go from being a means of
transportation to a sport to an
obsession to as this one guy was
complaining about going up toys to tap
and tiling every day it can come to
dominate your whole reason for going to
Thailand if your reason for going to
Thailand is to ride a bike up and down
the same mountain every day that's a
pretty meaningless existence and you
need to re-examine your motives you need
to be example why you went to Thailand
in the first place and what you're doing
with your life is it adult you know we
all do I don't mean that in a mean
spirited way we all need to re-examine
our motives for things numerous times I
said to someone recently you know in
talking about video game addiction the
point is not whether or not video games
are inherently addictive obviously a
bicycle is not inherently addictive and
so on not inherently bad in any way
200 years ago you'd be surrounded by
people very commonly meet people who
ruined their lives with addiction to
playing card games with a deck of cards
nothing addictive about a deck of cards
right indeed most card games become
boring two small children very quickly
most forms of gambling are boring to
most people but some minority of people
become obsessive about them and so on
so you know equal of a signal from any
block of wood an idol can be carved from
anything no matter how seemingly
harmless you know an obsession can take
hold and take over and I was witness to
example of that
when I was doing my long-distance
cycling just say I wasn't terribly
serious but I would go on runs of more
than a hundred kilometers in a day a guy
from South Korea who was renting the
apartment two doors over from me at the
time invention capital city of Laos a
South Korean guy who was basically a
journalist based involved in journalism
and photography and I think he was very
unhappy with the job at that time
already and he was a smoker he was
serious bookie cigarettes he met me and
he saw me riding the bike and he got
inspired I no idea why he got really
inspired to be involved with long
distance cycling and like all of these
guys you know he didn't buy one bicycle
he bought three you know first he bought
one bicycle that was expensive but then
you know he got into the bike he and he
learned that wasn't expensive then he
bought another one
the third bike he bought he's living in
a third-world country he's living in
Vientiane Laos where you can get cheap
bikes made in Taiwan
he ordered a custom-made bike from
Bianchi
you know bicycle manufacturer in Italy
you've got this custom racing bike he
was getting into buying the special
jerseys and all this government stuff I
didn't know I didn't want anything like
that
and he kept thanking me he kept saying
to me that I had inspired him and that
he would have never started riding a
bike and ever tennis the last time I met
that guy he had actually he was ranking
in the top 500 you know he was only he
was only number 400 or number 399 but he
was ranking in the top 500 of
competitive cyclists in Thailand cuz he
started competing in races and rankings
so so I saw this guy I mean I think he
was having a classic sort of midlife
crisis he oh he also quit his job but he
didn't quit smoking so still smoking
cigarettes he managed to to get ahead in
that sport man
as habits go it's one of the healthiest
and it's one of the least destructive
but ultimately we all got to face over
the fact that riding a bike up and down
a mountain is it's not the meaning of
life